docs(policy)_: Reintroduced the testing policy for full review (#6413)
status-im/status-go: _docs/policies/testing.md

# `status-go` Test Policy

## Purpose

This policy defines the requirements and guidelines for testing within the `status-go` repository. It aims to ensure all new functionality is introduced with robust, reliable, and repeatable tests 

> while preventing flaky tests from being merged into the codebase. This aligns with Policy Zero’s principles of transparency, collaboration, and quality assurance in the development process.

Reviewer: > while preventing flaky tests from being merged into the codebase

In my experience, many flaky tests are tricky and end up in the main branch because they resist verification attempts. Beyond addressing flaky tests during PRs, an important process is to define how/who/when to handle flaky tests after they infect the main branch. But perhaps the details of such a process can be defined in a non-policy doc.

> while preventing flaky tests from being merged into the codebase. This aligns with Policy Zero’s principles of transparency, collaboration, and quality assurance in the development process.

Reviewer: Most lines don't have spurious line breaks, but some do like this one. For consistency with the other policy `introduce-policy.md`, it's better to fill all paragraphs at ~80 chars.

## Submitting and Maintaining the Test Policy

- Any individual MAY propose amendments to this policy.
- Proposed changes MUST be submitted as a pull request (PR) to the `_docs/policies` directory in the `status-go` repository.
- The PR MUST include a brief justification for the amendment, answering: "Why is this change needed?"

> - The PR MUST follow the [Review and Approval Process](./introduce-policy.md#review-and-approval-process) outlined in Policy Zero.

Reviewer 2: I think this is redundant, as this is defined in the Policy Zero.

## Creating Tests

> - All new functionality MUST be introduced with tests that:

Reviewer: When it comes to the quality of tests, there are other characteristics not covered in the policy and we could go in more detail, but then, by going in more detail, I think we are already failing to use policies adequately. The policies are not great documents to iterate in my opinion and are too rigid and require too much coordination.

A few other characteristics:

- How sociable is the test?
- How does the test perform?
- How is the test structured in terms of arrange/act/assert?
- How much coverage should a test provide at a minimum?
- Is the test written using the best test pyramid level? Example: could the integration test be rewritten to be one or more unit tests, or a combination of different levels?
- Is the test verifying possible security threats?

> - This can be achieved using the `-count` or `-test.count` flag with the test command, e.g., `-count 1000` / `-test.count 1000`.

An example (to me) of something that seems too detailed to live in the policy.

  - Prove that the functionality performs as described

>   - Can be falsified

Reviewer 3: > Can be falsified

I think it can be elaborated. Maybe it's just me, but I think these 2 possible interpretations are different:

* Tests SHOULD not only verify the correct ("happy path"). Edge-case and failure-scenario testing proactively validates the new feature resilience to unusual or invalid input

* Falsifiable testing retroactively ensures that a bug is demonstrably captured by a test, ensuring that fixes address concrete, reproducible problems rather than hypothetical scenarios.

>   - Are resistant to fuzzing

Reviewer 2: Actually I don't think we need to specify the quality of the tests. I find our developers reasonable enough to implement tests that makes sense and cover the feature. This basically means "be a good developer, write good tests" 😄 We are good developers here!

Reviewer 2: So the point is: IMO just specifying that "the new functionality MUST be covered  with tests" is enough here.

> - All new `functional tests` MUST BE validated via a minimum of 1000 test runs.

Reviewer 4: I don't know functional tests that well, but `integration tests` are the usual culprits of flakiness, so either this is a swap or we need to add `integration` there too

Reviewer 2: This should probably apply to unit/integration (go) tests, not functional (python). The latter have not yet been noted to be flaky, so I wouldn't apply such strict rules there.

We have tests types definition here: [status-go/Test Types](https://www.notion.so/Test-Types-3bbd74484f994491a11f4f1fe4a157af?pvs=4).

>   - This can be achieved using the `-count` or `-test.count` flag with the test command, e.g., `-count 1000` / `-test.count 1000`.

Reviewer 2: I think this is unnecessary detail
```suggestion
  - This can be achieved using the `-count` or `-test.count` flag with the `go test` command
```

Reviewer 2: Btw, there's also `stress` tool, which is helpful: [status-go/Detect flaky tests](https://www.notion.so/Detect-flaky-tests-2ee4dba1f0e246a68981adc12fb6f652?pvs=4)

>   - Where the CI cannot support this workflow automatically, the developer MUST perform validation tests via local testing.

Reviewer: How will the PR author prove the N number of test runs were executed? Should the CI be responsible for detecting _new_ functional tests and increase their test count by default for the duration of the PR? Is it always feasible to mandate a minimum of 1000 test runs when some tests can take a significant amount of time to finish?

Reviewer 2: I agree that a CI check would be nice, but the effort to implement it might not be worth the results.

There're 3 cases when a test can become flaky, and each reason requires different effort to implement a CI check:

| Reason | How to CI check | Implementation difficulty<br>(out of 5) | Warnings |
|-|-|-|-|
| When implementing a new test | Check if this test exists on `develop` | 🔴 🔴 | - | 
| When changing and old test code | Check tests diff and find amended tests | 🔴 🔴 🔴 🔴 | - |
| When changing tested code (without changing the test itself) | Use external tools (e.g. [Sentry Carryforward flags](https://about.codecov.io/blog/new-product-test-only-what-you-change-with-carryforward-flags/)) | 🔴 🔴 🔴 🔴 | Some code may be used in ALL tests, which would make CI to verify all tests a 1000 times | 

I think we could some day implement (1), 
but I would not bother with (2), 
and there will always be (3), which is wrong to do (note the warning above).

👉 So for now I believe it's fine to require devs to run new/amended test locally and perhaps attach the execution report to the PR description/comment. At the same time teach devs to prevent flaky tests, so that we won't even need to run tests a 1000 times.

Reviewer: I had a feeling CI detection would be tricky, but I wasn't expecting such a detailed answer. Thanks @igor-sirotin 💯 I completely agree with your conclusions.

One idea to improve the effectiveness of the test suite is to randomly select a subset of tests and increase their run count (randomly as well if we like). Essentially, we'd extend the total test run time by a controlled amount. This would raise the chances of catching flaky tests before they hit `develop`. As the suite gets more stable, we could gradually reduce the randomness factor. We could also increase the number of affected tests by the random selection in CI by using dedicated jobs (e.g. twice per day with 10% of the test suite running between 10-200 times).

Is the idea above practical and perhaps straightforward?

>   - Where the CI cannot support this workflow automatically, the developer MUST perform validation tests via local testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Where the CI cannot support this workflow automatically, the developer MUST perform validation tests locally.
```

    - `TODO` Add link to issue for CI automation of validation test runs of new `functional tests`.

>   - Ensuring that the test passes consistently every time gives confidence that the test is not flaky.

Reviewer: We know one source of flakyness is external network dependency. I wonder if we can just define in status-go that certain tests (e.g. within a certain standardized directory like `./unit/` or following a specific naming pattern) should automatically block outbound traffic. I wonder if a hard block using a firewall in the CI could be practical, but it would be better I think if we could do from Go directly.

I'm just looking for ways to rely less on conventions and trust.

- Has an existing test become flaky?
  - Check rerun reports. `TODO` Add link to rerun reports.
    - If the test does not appear in https://github.com/status-im/status-go/labels/E%3AFlaky%20Test or in the last three nightly test runs, it is most likely that the flakiness was introduced by 
your changes and needs to be addressed before proceeding with the merge.
    - Otherwise, the test is already documented as a flaky test (appears in the GitHub issues or in the nightly test runs), proceed to below.

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A([PR ready for merge]) --> B{Have any test failed?}
    B -->|No| C[🎉 Proceed with merge 🪄]
    B -->|Yes| D{
        Is the failing test introduced
        or altered by this PR?
    }
    D -->|No| E[Check rerun reports.]
    D -->|Yes| F[
        It is likely your changes introduced the flakiness.
        You MUST fix the test before merge is acceptable.
    ]
    F --> A
    E --> G{Does the test appear in `E:Flaky Test` issues<br/> or in the last three nightly test runs?<br/>}
    G -->|Yes| I[The flakiness needs reporting]
    G -->|No| F
    I --> J([Proceed to Reporting flow])
```

#### Reporting Flaky Tests

> If an old test fails and/or seems flaky either locally or in CI, you MUST report the event.

Reviewer: Is the lack of a blank line after the headline intentional? The other one at level 2 `## Flaky Tests` above has a blank line.

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A([Ready to report a flaky test]) --> B[Check the `status-go` GitHub repo<br/>issues for the test name failing.]
    B --> C{Does the test appear in<br/>the list of `E: Flaky Test` issues?}
    C -->|No| D[
        Create a new issue
      - The issue title should include the flaky test name
      - The issue should use the `E:Flaky Test` label
    ]
    D --> E[
        Detail which test is flaky and in what context:
        local vs CI, link to the PR or branch.
    ]
    E --> J
    C -->|Yes| F{Is the issue open?}
    F -->|No| G((Either))
    H --> E
    G --> I[Reopen the issue]
    G --> D
    I --> H
    F -->|Yes| H[Add a comment to the issue]
    J([End])
```

## Policy Amendments and Archival

- Amendments:
  - This policy MAY be amended at any time.
  - Amendments MUST be submitted via a PR to the `status-go` repository.
- Archival:
  - This policy MAY be archived if it becomes obsolete or replaced by newer policies.
  - Archival MUST be performed by submitting a PR that moves the policy to `_docs/policies/archived`.
- The PR MUST include a rationale for the proposed amendment or archival in the PR description.

> - The PR MUST follow the [Review and Approval Process](./introduce-policy.md#review-and-approval-process) outlined in Policy Zero.

Reviewer 2: This I believe is also redundant, as it is specified in the policy zero, which applies to all policies.

> 

Reviewer: Two extra lines.
